a) What is the difference between Phong shading and Phong lighting (the
Phong reflection model)?

The phong reflection model is lighting calculations made for any given normals of a point or surface if needed.
it includes the terms, diffuse, ambient and reflection

Phong shading is the method of calculation normals between vertexes on a per pixel basis rather
than doing it on a per vertex normal


b) What is the difference between flat shading, Gouraud shading, and Phong
shading? List pros and cons of each.

Flat shading
This is super fast and precise when it comes to very specific situations.

with the vectors n = point normal, l = light intensity, and v = viewer or COP some assumptions can be made to
make these variables, constants.
in the case that a surface is a perfect plane, n becomes constant. all points and faces point in the exact same direction
and n can be calculated once for all points.
l and v can become a constant if distant enough to n. with a large enough distance or plane size difference to the light source and viewer
all points on a given plane will, at least to within a satisfactory error margin, in relation the the viewer be illuminated equally.

a pro could be that no interpolations are needed with is also a con as this produces march bands.

The big drawback is the very specific situations this requires to be producing a satisfactory results
as mach bands become frequent outside optimal usecases.


Gouraud shading
Also known as smooth shading, Gouraud uses the same vectors n, l, and v to calculate color values on each vertex
where the rasterizer interpolates the difference between the different colors giving the illusion of a smoother highpoly mesh.
This results in a smooth transition of vertex colors between adjacent vertex colors which is still fast but slower than flat shading.
but this can be used in other settings so its a con/pro.

A big drawback to this method would be that highlights or areas with a high contrast will be appearing
to "jump" around the mesh on low poly meshes. this is due to calculations are done on a per vertex basis instead on a pixel or surface base.

Another drawback would be that this shading method requires more data structures to handle correct vertex normal calculations
as this method needs a vertex normal to be the averaged normals of all adjacent polygons that share that vertex.


Phong shading.
Phong shading dont need the rasterizer to interpolate between vertex colors but in contrast interpolates
the surface normals which gets renormalized in the the fragment shader.
this is slower as it is on a per pixel basis not a vertex one but will produce better and more realistic results.


c) What is the difference between a directional light and a point light?

point lights have a position in the coordinate space and will illuminate in all directions.
directional lights only have an direction and will only light any polygon facing the directional light source

directional lights have no position so has no distance to anything. this means that ALL facing polygons gets lit.
point lights DO have a position and therefore a distance to polygons in worldspace.
Meaning that facing it is not enought to get lit, the polygon must also be close enough.


d) Does the eye position influence the shading of an object in any way?
Only the reflection of a surface gets influenced by the observing eyes position.
a single reflection can be observered differently based on the position of the eye.


Ambient light is practically constant around the entire object even if it cant be seen by the eye.
Diffuse light is also constant as no different position will have a lit point change in values.

e) What is the effect of setting the specular term to (0, 0, 0)?
The observed highlights would simply disappear

f) What is the effect of increasing the shininess exponent (𝛼𝛼)?

The effect is that as the shininess exponent increases so does the highlight point on a mesh decrease in size.
the higher the exponent the closer to "the perfect reflection" angle is needed to produce a highlight

g) In what coordinate space did you compute the lighting?
I did it in eye-space as the book dictated.
